bootandshoe/commands/iterate_plan.md, before:

---
description: Iterate on existing implementation plans with thorough research and updates
model: opus
---

# Iterate Implementation Plan

You are tasked with updating existing implementation plans based on user feedback. You should be skeptical, thorough, and ensure changes are grounded in actual codebase reality.

## Initial Response

When this command is invoked:

1. **Parse the input to identify**:
   - Plan file path (e.g., `thoughts/shared/plans/2025-10-16-feature.md`)
   - Requested changes/feedback

2. **Handle different input scenarios**:

   **If NO plan file provided**:
   ```
   I'll help you iterate on an existing implementation plan.

   Which plan would you like to update? Please provide the path to the plan file (e.g., `thoughts/shared/plans/2025-10-16-feature.md`).

   Tip: You can list recent plans with `ls -lt thoughts/shared/plans/ | head`
   ```
   Wait for user input, then re-check for feedback.

   **If plan file provided but NO feedback**:
   ```
   I've found the plan at [path]. What changes would you like to make?

   For example:
   - "Add a phase for migration handling"
   - "Update the success criteria to include performance tests"
   - "Adjust the scope to exclude feature X"
   - "Split Phase 2 into two separate phases"
   ```
   Wait for user input.

   **If BOTH plan file AND feedback provided**:
   - Proceed immediately to Step 1
   - No preliminary questions needed

## Process Steps

### Step 1: Read and Understand Current Plan

1. **Read the existing plan file COMPLETELY**:
   - Use the Read tool WITHOUT limit/offset parameters
   - Understand the current structure, phases, and scope
   - Note the success criteria and implementation approach

2. **Understand the requested changes**:
   - Parse what the user wants to add/modify/remove
   - Identify if changes require codebase research
   - Determine scope of the update

### Step 2: Research If Needed

**Only spawn research tasks if the changes require new technical understanding.**

If the user's feedback requires understanding new code patterns or validating assumptions:

1. **Create a research todo list** using TodoWrite

2. **Spawn parallel sub-tasks for research**:
   Use the right agent for each type of research:

   **For code investigation:**
   - **codebase-locator** - To find relevant files
   - **codebase-analyzer** - To understand implementation details
   - **codebase-pattern-finder** - To find similar patterns

   **For historical context:**
   - **thoughts-locator** - To find related research or decisions
   - **thoughts-analyzer** - To extract insights from documents

   **Be EXTREMELY specific about directories**:
   - If the change involves "WUI", specify `bootandshoe-wui/` directory
   - If it involves "daemon", specify `hld/` directory
   - Include full path context in prompts

3. **Read any new files identified by research**:
   - Read them FULLY into the main context
   - Cross-reference with the plan requirements

4. **Wait for ALL sub-tasks to complete** before proceeding

### Web Research for Plan Updates

When user feedback introduces new technical considerations:

1. **Identify knowledge gaps**: If the requested change involves something you're uncertain about
2. **Suggest targeted research**:
   ```
   Your feedback about [topic] is a good point. Would you like me to search the
   web for current best practices on [specific aspect] before updating the plan?
   ```
3. **Wait for confirmation**: Only spawn web-search-researcher if user approves
4. **Incorporate findings**: Update the plan with researched best practices

### Step 3: Clarify Change Type (If Needed)

If the type of change isn't clear from the feedback, use AskUserQuestion:

```
AskUserQuestion:
Question: "What type of changes are needed?"
Header: "Change type"
multiSelect: true
Options:
- "Add new phase" - Insert additional implementation phase
- "Modify existing phase" - Update details of current phase
- "Update success criteria" - Change how we verify completion
- "Adjust scope" - Change what's in/out of scope
```

Use the selected options to focus your understanding and research.

### Step 4: Present Understanding and Approach

Before making changes, confirm your understanding:

```
Based on your feedback, I understand you want to:
- [Change 1 with specific detail]
- [Change 2 with specific detail]

My research found:
- [Relevant code pattern or constraint]
- [Important discovery that affects the change]

I plan to update the plan by:
1. [Specific modification to make]
2. [Another modification]
```

Then use AskUserQuestion to confirm:

```
AskUserQuestion:
Question: "Does this capture the changes you want?"
Header: "Confirm"
Options:
- "Yes, make changes" - Proceed with updates
- "Needs adjustment" - Will clarify what's different
- "Research first" - Need more codebase investigation
- "Cancel" - Don't make changes right now
```

**Based on response:**
- If "Yes, make changes": Proceed to Step 5
- If "Needs adjustment": Ask what's different, update understanding, re-confirm
- If "Research first": Spawn additional codebase research agents, then re-present understanding
- If "Cancel": Acknowledge and end gracefully without making edits

### Feedback Tag Processing

When the user responds, check for feedback in addition to their regular response. There are two feedback formats to handle:

#### Legacy Inline Format
Simple `<feedback>` tags wrapping content directly:
```
<feedback>
Add a rollback step to Phase 2 in case the migration fails
</feedback>
```

#### Marker-Based Format
This format uses HTML comment markers for precise text references:

**In the document** - markers wrap the specific text being discussed:
```
<!--fb:a1b2c3-->marked text that needs feedback<!--/fb:a1b2c3-->
```

**At end of file** - the actual feedback comments in a feedback section:
```
---
<feedback-section>
<feedback id="a1b2c3">
The actual feedback comment about the marked text
</feedback>
</feedback-section>
```

**How to process marker-based feedback:**
1. Find all `<feedback>` entries in the `<feedback-section>` at end of file
2. For each feedback, locate the corresponding marker by ID (`<!--fb:id-->...<!--/fb:id-->`)
3. Understand the context by reading the marked text
4. Address the feedback and update the plan accordingly
5. Remove the marker and feedback entry when resolved

**To remove resolved feedback:**
- Delete the `<!--fb:id-->` and `<!--/fb:id-->` markers (keep the text between them)
- Delete the corresponding `<feedback id="id">...</feedback>` entry
- If the feedback section becomes empty, remove it entirely

#### Processing Guidelines
1. **Parse feedback** - Extract all tagged feedback in either format
2. **Prioritize tagged feedback** - These are specific, actionable items
3. **Incorporate into your changes** - Address each tagged item explicitly
4. **Confirm resolution** - Show how each feedback item was addressed
5. **Clean up** - Remove resolved feedback markers and entries

Your response should acknowledge and address all feedback items before making changes.

### Step 5: Update the Plan

1. **Make focused, precise edits** to the existing plan:
   - Use the Edit tool for surgical changes
   - Maintain the existing structure unless explicitly changing it
   - Keep all file:line references accurate
   - Update success criteria if needed

2. **Ensure consistency**:
   - If adding a new phase, ensure it follows the existing pattern
   - If modifying scope, update "What We're NOT Doing" section
   - If changing approach, update "Implementation Approach" section
   - Maintain the distinction between automated vs manual success criteria

3. **Preserve quality standards**:
   - Include specific file paths and line numbers for new content
   - Write measurable success criteria
   - Use `make` commands for automated verification
   - Keep language clear and actionable

### Step 6: Review

1. **Present the changes made**:
   ```
   I've updated the plan at `thoughts/shared/plans/[filename].md`

   Changes made:
   - [Specific change 1]
   - [Specific change 2]

   The updated plan now:
   - [Key improvement]
   - [Another improvement]

   Would you like any further adjustments?
   ```

3. **Be ready to iterate further** based on feedback

## Important Guidelines

1. **Be Skeptical**:
   - Don't blindly accept change requests that seem problematic
   - Question vague feedback - ask for clarification
   - Verify technical feasibility with code research
   - Point out potential conflicts with existing plan phases

2. **Be Surgical**:
   - Make precise edits, not wholesale rewrites
   - Preserve good content that doesn't need changing
   - Only research what's necessary for the specific changes
   - Don't over-engineer the updates

3. **Be Thorough**:
   - Read the entire existing plan before making changes
   - Research code patterns if changes require new technical understanding
   - Ensure updated sections maintain quality standards
   - Verify success criteria are still measurable

4. **Be Interactive**:
   - Confirm understanding before making changes
   - Show what you plan to change before doing it
   - Allow course corrections
   - Don't disappear into research without communicating

5. **Track Progress**:
   - Use TodoWrite to track update tasks if complex
   - Update todos as you complete research
   - Mark tasks complete when done

6. **No Open Questions**:
   - If the requested change raises questions, ASK
   - Research or get clarification immediately
   - Do NOT update the plan with unresolved questions
   - Every change must be complete and actionable

## Success Criteria Guidelines

When updating success criteria, always maintain the two-category structure:

1. **Automated Verification** (can be run by execution agents):
   - Commands that can be run: `make test`, `npm run lint`, etc.
   - Prefer `make` commands: `make -C bootandshoe-wui check` instead of `cd bootandshoe-wui && bun run fmt`
   - Specific files that should exist
   - Code compilation/type checking

2. **Manual Verification** (requires human testing):
   - UI/UX functionality
   - Performance under real conditions
   - Edge cases that are hard to automate
   - User acceptance criteria

## Sub-task Spawning Best Practices

When spawning research sub-tasks:

1. **Only spawn if truly needed** - don't research for simple changes
2. **Spawn multiple tasks in parallel** for efficiency
3. **Each task should be focused** on a specific area
4. **Provide detailed instructions** including:
   - Exactly what to search for
   - Which directories to focus on
   - What information to extract
   - Expected output format
5. **Request specific file:line references** in responses
6. **Wait for all tasks to complete** before synthesizing
7. **Verify sub-task results** - if something seems off, spawn follow-up tasks

## Example Interaction Flows

**Scenario 1: User provides everything upfront**
```
User: /iterate_plan thoughts/shared/plans/2025-10-16-feature.md - add phase for error handling
Assistant: [Reads plan, researches error handling patterns, updates plan]
```

**Scenario 2: User provides just plan file**
```
User: /iterate_plan thoughts/shared/plans/2025-10-16-feature.md
Assistant: I've found the plan. What changes would you like to make?
User: Split Phase 2 into two phases - one for backend, one for frontend
Assistant: [Proceeds with update]
```

**Scenario 3: User provides no arguments**
```
User: /iterate_plan
Assistant: Which plan would you like to update? Please provide the path...
User: thoughts/shared/plans/2025-10-16-feature.md
Assistant: I've found the plan. What changes would you like to make?
User: Add more specific success criteria
Assistant: [Proceeds with update]
```

Commit message:

Integrate plan mode and use fully qualified agent names
Update create_plan, iterate_plan, and their variants to write to the
plan mode file and call ExitPlanMode instead of managing their own
plan files. Rename step labels to phases (Understanding, Design,
Review, Final Plan, Exit Plan Mode). Remove TodoWrite references.

Use bootandshoe:-prefixed agent names throughout all commands and docs
to match the plugin's fully qualified naming convention.

bootandshoe/commands/iterate_plan.md, after:

---
description: Iterate on existing implementation plans with thorough research and updates
model: opus
---

# Iterate Implementation Plan (Plan Mode)

You are tasked with updating existing implementation plans based on user feedback. You should be skeptical, thorough, and ensure changes are grounded in actual codebase reality.

**This command runs within plan mode.** Read the existing plan, make updates, and write the result to the plan file designated by plan mode (the path provided in the plan mode system message). When finished, call `ExitPlanMode` so the user can review and approve in VS Code.

## Initial Response

When this command is invoked:

1. **Parse the input to identify**:
   - Plan file path (e.g., `thoughts/shared/plans/2025-10-16-feature.md`)
   - Requested changes/feedback

2. **Handle different input scenarios**:

   **If NO plan file provided**:
   ```
   I'll help you iterate on an existing implementation plan.

   Which plan would you like to update? Please provide the path to the plan file (e.g., `thoughts/shared/plans/2025-10-16-feature.md`).

   Tip: You can list recent plans with `ls -lt thoughts/shared/plans/ | head`
   ```
   Wait for user input, then re-check for feedback.

   **If plan file provided but NO feedback**:
   ```
   I've found the plan at [path]. What changes would you like to make?

   For example:
   - "Add a phase for migration handling"
   - "Update the success criteria to include performance tests"
   - "Adjust the scope to exclude feature X"
   - "Split Phase 2 into two separate phases"
   ```
   Wait for user input.

   **If BOTH plan file AND feedback provided**:
   - Proceed immediately to Step 1
   - No preliminary questions needed

## Process Steps

### Step 1: Read and Understand Current Plan

1. **Read the existing plan file COMPLETELY**:
   - Use the Read tool WITHOUT limit/offset parameters
   - Understand the current structure, phases, and scope
   - Note the success criteria and implementation approach

2. **Understand the requested changes**:
   - Parse what the user wants to add/modify/remove
   - Identify if changes require codebase research
   - Determine scope of the update

### Step 2: Research If Needed

**Only spawn research tasks if the changes require new technical understanding.**

If the user's feedback requires understanding new code patterns or validating assumptions:

1. **Spawn parallel sub-tasks for research**:
   Use the right agent for each type of research:

   **For code investigation:**
   - **bootandshoe:codebase-locator** - To find relevant files
   - **bootandshoe:codebase-analyzer** - To understand implementation details
   - **bootandshoe:codebase-pattern-finder** - To find similar patterns

   **For historical context:**
   - **bootandshoe:thoughts-locator** - To find related research or decisions
   - **bootandshoe:thoughts-analyzer** - To extract insights from documents

   **Be EXTREMELY specific about directories**:
   - If the change involves "WUI", specify `bootandshoe-wui/` directory
   - If it involves "daemon", specify `hld/` directory
   - Include full path context in prompts

2. **Read any new files identified by research**:
   - Read them FULLY into the main context
   - Cross-reference with the plan requirements

3. **Wait for ALL sub-tasks to complete** before proceeding

### Web Research for Plan Updates

When user feedback introduces new technical considerations:

1. **Identify knowledge gaps**: If the requested change involves something you're uncertain about
2. **Suggest targeted research**:
   ```
   Your feedback about [topic] is a good point. Would you like me to search the
   web for current best practices on [specific aspect] before updating the plan?
   ```
3. **Wait for confirmation**: Only spawn bootandshoe:web-search-researcher if user approves
4. **Incorporate findings**: Update the plan with researched best practices

### Step 3: Clarify Change Type (If Needed)

If the type of change isn't clear from the feedback, use AskUserQuestion:

```
AskUserQuestion:
Question: "What type of changes are needed?"
Header: "Change type"
multiSelect: true
Options:
- "Add new phase" - Insert additional implementation phase
- "Modify existing phase" - Update details of current phase
- "Update success criteria" - Change how we verify completion
- "Adjust scope" - Change what's in/out of scope
```

Use the selected options to focus your understanding and research.

### Step 4: Present Understanding and Approach

Before making changes, confirm your understanding:

```
Based on your feedback, I understand you want to:
- [Change 1 with specific detail]
- [Change 2 with specific detail]

My research found:
- [Relevant code pattern or constraint]
- [Important discovery that affects the change]

I plan to update the plan by:
1. [Specific modification to make]
2. [Another modification]
```

Then use AskUserQuestion to confirm:

```
AskUserQuestion:
Question: "Does this capture the changes you want?"
Header: "Confirm"
Options:
- "Yes, make changes" - Proceed with updates
- "Needs adjustment" - Will clarify what's different
- "Research first" - Need more codebase investigation
- "Cancel" - Don't make changes right now
```

**Based on response:**
- If "Yes, make changes": Proceed to Step 5
- If "Needs adjustment": Ask what's different, update understanding, re-confirm
- If "Research first": Spawn additional codebase research agents, then re-present understanding
- If "Cancel": Acknowledge and end gracefully without making edits

### Feedback Tag Processing

When the user responds, check for feedback in addition to their regular response. There are two feedback formats to handle:

#### Legacy Inline Format
Simple `<feedback>` tags wrapping content directly:
```
<feedback>
Add a rollback step to Phase 2 in case the migration fails
</feedback>
```

#### Marker-Based Format
This format uses HTML comment markers for precise text references:

**In the document** - markers wrap the specific text being discussed:
```
<!--fb:a1b2c3-->marked text that needs feedback<!--/fb:a1b2c3-->
```

**At end of file** - the actual feedback comments in a feedback section:
```
---
<feedback-section>
<feedback id="a1b2c3">
The actual feedback comment about the marked text
</feedback>
</feedback-section>
```

**How to process marker-based feedback:**
1. Find all `<feedback>` entries in the `<feedback-section>` at end of file
2. For each feedback, locate the corresponding marker by ID (`<!--fb:id-->...<!--/fb:id-->`)
3. Understand the context by reading the marked text
4. Address the feedback and update the plan accordingly
5. Remove the marker and feedback entry when resolved

**To remove resolved feedback:**
- Delete the `<!--fb:id-->` and `<!--/fb:id-->` markers (keep the text between them)
- Delete the corresponding `<feedback id="id">...</feedback>` entry
- If the feedback section becomes empty, remove it entirely

#### Processing Guidelines
1. **Parse feedback** - Extract all tagged feedback in either format
2. **Prioritize tagged feedback** - These are specific, actionable items
3. **Incorporate into your changes** - Address each tagged item explicitly
4. **Confirm resolution** - Show how each feedback item was addressed
5. **Clean up** - Remove resolved feedback markers and entries

Your response should acknowledge and address all feedback items before making changes.

### Step 5: Update the Plan

1. **Make focused, precise edits** to the plan file:
   - Use the Edit tool for surgical changes
   - Maintain the existing structure unless explicitly changing it
   - Keep all file:line references accurate
   - Update success criteria if needed

2. **Ensure consistency**:
   - If adding a new phase, ensure it follows the existing pattern
   - If modifying scope, update "What We're NOT Doing" section
   - If changing approach, update "Implementation Approach" section
   - Maintain the distinction between automated vs manual success criteria

3. **Preserve quality standards**:
   - Include specific file paths and line numbers for new content
   - Write measurable success criteria
   - Use `make` commands for automated verification
   - Keep language clear and actionable

### Step 6: Exit Plan Mode

After updating the plan:

1. **Present the changes made**:
   ```
   I've updated the plan.

   Changes made:
   - [Specific change 1]
   - [Specific change 2]

   The updated plan now:
   - [Key improvement]
   - [Another improvement]
   ```

2. **Call `ExitPlanMode`** so the user can review the updated plan in VS Code.

## Important Guidelines

1. **Be Skeptical**:
   - Don't blindly accept change requests that seem problematic
   - Question vague feedback - ask for clarification
   - Verify technical feasibility with code research
   - Point out potential conflicts with existing plan phases

2. **Be Surgical**:
   - Make precise edits, not wholesale rewrites
   - Preserve good content that doesn't need changing
   - Only research what's necessary for the specific changes
   - Don't over-engineer the updates

3. **Be Thorough**:
   - Read the entire existing plan before making changes
   - Research code patterns if changes require new technical understanding
   - Ensure updated sections maintain quality standards
   - Verify success criteria are still measurable

4. **Be Interactive**:
   - Confirm understanding before making changes
   - Show what you plan to change before doing it
   - Allow course corrections
   - Don't disappear into research without communicating

5. **No Open Questions**:
   - If the requested change raises questions, ASK
   - Research or get clarification immediately
   - Do NOT update the plan with unresolved questions
   - Every change must be complete and actionable

## Success Criteria Guidelines

When updating success criteria, always maintain the two-category structure:

1. **Automated Verification** (can be run by execution agents):
   - Commands that can be run: `make test`, `npm run lint`, etc.
   - Prefer `make` commands: `make -C bootandshoe-wui check` instead of `cd bootandshoe-wui && bun run fmt`
   - Specific files that should exist
   - Code compilation/type checking

2. **Manual Verification** (requires human testing):
   - UI/UX functionality
   - Performance under real conditions
   - Edge cases that are hard to automate
   - User acceptance criteria

## Sub-task Spawning Best Practices

When spawning research sub-tasks:

1. **Only spawn if truly needed** - don't research for simple changes
2. **Spawn multiple tasks in parallel** for efficiency
3. **Each task should be focused** on a specific area
4. **Provide detailed instructions** including:
   - Exactly what to search for
   - Which directories to focus on
   - What information to extract
   - Expected output format
5. **Request specific file:line references** in responses
6. **Wait for all tasks to complete** before synthesizing
7. **Verify sub-task results** - if something seems off, spawn follow-up tasks

## Example Interaction Flows

**Scenario 1: User provides everything upfront**
```
User: /iterate_plan thoughts/shared/plans/2025-10-16-feature.md - add phase for error handling
Assistant: [Reads plan, researches error handling patterns, updates plan, calls ExitPlanMode]
```

**Scenario 2: User provides just plan file**
```
User: /iterate_plan thoughts/shared/plans/2025-10-16-feature.md
Assistant: I've found the plan. What changes would you like to make?
User: Split Phase 2 into two phases - one for backend, one for frontend
Assistant: [Proceeds with update, calls ExitPlanMode]
```

**Scenario 3: User provides no arguments**
```
User: /iterate_plan
Assistant: Which plan would you like to update? Please provide the path...
User: thoughts/shared/plans/2025-10-16-feature.md
Assistant: I've found the plan. What changes would you like to make?
User: Add more specific success criteria
Assistant: [Proceeds with update, calls ExitPlanMode]
```
